# The Incompatible Timesharing System

ITS, the Incompatible Timesharing System, is a historical operating
system made by MIT hackers for PDP-10 computers.

### What is the PDP-10 computer?

The PDP-10 family of computers was made by Digital Equipment
Corporation.  It started in the early 1960s as the 36-bit PDP-6
computer.  It was deemed a failure, and was cancelled.  However, the
computer was popular and revived as the PDP-10 as few years later.  If
was popular with engineers and in academia and was one of the most
common computers on the ARPA network which was a precursor to the
Internet.

### MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

The AI lab was formed in the late 1950s by John McCarthy and Marvin
Minsky.  MIT is the Birthplace of Lisp, and the concept of a "hack", a
clever and possible subvertive prank.  Computer enthustiast flocking
to MIT came to call their clever programming hacking, and themselves
as hackers.

MIT had an IBM 7094 mainframe running CTSS, the Compatible
Time-Sharing System.  This system was compatible with a previous
batch-oriented system and as a result was clunky and not very
interactive.  Hackers wanted close interaction with computers and
disliked CTSS.  The successor Multics was also viewed has not
interactive enough.

The AI lab first used a PDP-1, but this computer was too small and
limited.  The lab got a PDP-6 in 1964, which was first used
standalone, one person at a time.  Programmers had full exclusive
access to all of the machine.  The debugger DDT was an important tool.

### Incompatible Timesharing System

To have AI researchers waiting in line for access to the PDP-6 was too
inefficient.  There was a need for timesharing on the PDP-6.  Richard
Greenblatt and others wrote a timesharing system in 1967.  The system
relied on the Moby memory, 256K of 40-bits words.  Tom Knight came up
with the name Incompatible Timesharing System, and a play on and jab
against CTSS.  Like before timewharing, DDT was the user interface.

Unlike CTSS, ITS is very interactive system where programs often suppy
a response after earch key press.  Tehre are no security restrictions,
no passwords.  Source code for everything.  Guests and randoms allowed
on the system.  Hackers had little supervision and were free to invent
what they perceived as the best possible operating system and tooling.

Early on, ITS was host to a number of influential programs.  Terry
Winograd created SHRDLU, a simulated robot that would rearrange blocks
and answer questions according to input typed in plain English.  The
spartan Lisp created on an IBM mainframe was ported to the PDP-6 and
evolved into Maclisp, maintained by Guy Steele.  Joel Moses' doctorate
thesis became Macsyma.  Richard Greenblatt, an avid chess player,
wrote Machack VI which was for a long time the best computer chess
program.

In the late 1960s, ITS was ported to a PDP-10.  Soon a home-made
memory management unit for virtual memory was added, and the future
Ethernet inventor Robert Metcalfe attached hardware to connect to the
ARPA network.  Raster graphics.  Three more machines.  Logo (Papert),
Muddle, Maze (Lebling et al), CLU (Liskov), Emacs (Stallman), Scheme
(Steele), Zork (Lebling et al).

Decline period.  Shut down 1990.

Legacy: GNU project, Emacs, Info, Lisp, Unix job control, more.

### Hands-on example

Some commands, a few lines of code, eye candy pictures.

Lisp, Macsyma, Logo?

### Side bars?

Maybe amusing anecdotes?  The Magic Switch (with photo).  "The most
expensive terminal emulator in history."

### Links, references, bibliography.

http://github.com/PDP-10/its  
Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution, Steven Levy  

### Copyleft

ↄ⃝ Lars Brinkhoff, All Rights Reversed
