# The world's most expensive terminal emulator

SYSDOC; ITSTTY 41 mentions a terminal type called 340D: "*the 340D
program does a CNSSET to the sty it uses, setting it to be a datapoint
with a peculiar screen size. This causes ITS to send datapoint cursor
motion codes to the tty. The 340D program reads them from the sty and
simulates their effect in the display that it maintains on the 340.*"

What is this 340D program?  Searching backups and file listings
revealed nothing.

The .INFO.; TCTYP ORDER file agrees: "*340D - Declares the terminal to
be the 340 datapoint simulator.*"  And the source code for TCTYP
specifies the screen size to be 80 columns by 40 lines.

Finally I found a trace.  A backup listing includes a link from SYS1;
TS 340D to STAN.K; MOD11 BIN.  But it's a dangling link -- MOD11 BIN
was not backed up, and indeed there is no file named MOD11 anywhere.

But there's a clue: STAN.K turns out to be Stan Kugell who was at MIT
and later the Stanford AI Lab.  I contact Stan and ask about 340D, not
expecting him to remember much after more than forty years.  But not
only does Stan remember his 340D program quite vividly, he's one of
the few who remembers there was a SAIL keyboard.  And on top of that,
340D could make use of that keyboard.

Stan also tells me 340D ran on the PDP-6.  As such, this be the most
expensive terminal emulator in history.  A $300,000 mainframe -- in
1965 dollars! -- emulating a lowly Datapoint terminal.  He wrote
"*there was a chronic shortage of free terminals at the lab, and the
PDP-6 sat idle or was running KLHâ€™s Spacewar most of the time, so
using it for a terminal was both a laugh (an absurdly extravagant use
of an entire PDP-6 and display) and also practical solution.*"

Since this sounds like both a useful and fun program to have, I set
out to recreate it from what little information there is.  I make it
simple -- just a normal PDP-10 program running in timesharing and
using ITS' built-in 340 display list facility.  When the first
revision is done, I also update the PDP-10 emulator to receive
keyboard events from the 340 window and feed them to ITS using the I/O
bus hardware device.  This device can only handle one single keyboard
-- evidence that is was a one-off thing, possibly only used to get
Stanford's CAD program SUDS running.

Month later I stumble across a rather innocously looking file named
3406 40.  Just a series of numbers, nothing to be excited about...
except it's in the STAN.K directory.  And if you read it just so it
looks like "340 6", maybe even "340 PDP-6".  When I see the file, I'm
first dissapointed.  Sure, it does poke the 340 display, but it's so
short it can't possibly have anything to do with 340D.  Still, since
it's Stan's work, I send the file to him.  He agrees: "*looks like
maybe a fragment of some test/debug thing.*"

I push it to the side, but when I later examine it more closely my
interst is piqued.  I see a table converting ASCII character codes to
the codes used by the Type 342 character generator.  This piece of
hardware was an optional part of the 340 display, and was responsible
for converting 6-bit character codes to electronic pulses understood
by the display.

Some sites, like the Pennsylvania State University which had quite
possibly the last operational KA10 and 340 display, didn't affort the
342 and had to painstakinly write code to draw all characters vector
by vector.  MIT not only had the 342, they also had the additional
second set of 64 characters allowing the luxury of lower case letters.

I read the 3406 program very closely, and now I see it's all there.
There is one buffer for 7-bit ASCII characters, 80 characters wide and
40 lines high.  And another one for converted 6-bit characters using
the 340 codes.  The program cleverly checks whether screen lines are
flagged for updates, and only redraws those.

I hurriedly move the file onto my ITS system and assemble it with
MIDAS.  As usual with programs this age, an older version of the
assembler does a better job, but apart from that 3406 assembles
cleanly.  I load it onto the PDP-6, and have my DDT make an inferior
job called "PDP6".

In ITS, subprocesses are called inferior jobs, and they are tagged
with a name rather than a numerical ID.  If you name a job "PDP6", a
special feature kicks in.  This job now accesses the core memory of
the PDP-6, rather than a virtual address range in ITS.  This is very
handy for running and debugging code on the PDP-6.

Since my recreated 340D doesn't yet talk to 3406, I use DDT to write
information directly to the data structures in the running PDP-6
program.  I use DDT's `$$1"` command to enter ASCII text -- not one I
regularly use, so I have to look it up first.  I write "HELLO WORLD"
in the input text buffer.  Nothing happens yet, because the line isn't
flagged for an update.  As soon as I type `FLAGS/ -1,,$Q`, the magic
happens.  The 340 display merrily greets the universe.  And the 3406
program does it job once again after so many decades.

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/775050/57076117-1bbc0f00-6ce9-11e9-8c98-c8c568e380fb.png)
